I'm alert today. Go ahead. You don't want to
stagger these five minutes this time? You don't
want to stagger these five minutes? No. I don't
want to go this time. Well, I'll just start at the
same time. I'd like to begin today's interview
actually with where the last interview ended. I
want you to talk some more about crustaceans.
What began your interest in them particularly?
and where you are in terms of your research now with
crustaceans. Last time you said that they
intrigued you and that Gil Rowe at Woods Hole was
involved in taking a look at them.
Oh, no, you're getting me into hot water, but go
ahead. When are you ready? I'm ready. All right.
Well, the crustaceans are... interest to me
because of the important role they play in the
marine environment.
Crustaceans predominate in the pelagic, in the
water column. Perhaps some of the most Numerous
organisms on Earth, metazoan-type organisms,
are copepods, which are an important link in many
of the so-called food webs of the ocean. And so I
feel that for that kind of reason alone, however,
my interests are in the bottom-dwelling forms,
primarily bentonic forms. And I was particularly
stimulated because of the fact that the
brachiorhyns, or the true crabs, tend to be
shallow water forms. They are very predominant in
the shallow water on the continental shelf and
become... far less numerous but equally
interesting in the deep water. As a matter of fact,
also, one of the largest of the crabs, of the true
crabs, the giant red crab, as it's called,
attracted my attention as a possible source of
food. I make the distinction of true crab because
the Alaska king crab, for example, is not a true
crab. It is a hermit crab type. And we have a large
representative of that group in the Gulf of Mexico
as well. But this giant red crab is a true brack
urine crab.
Now, in addition to that, I found some crabs in the
bottom of the Gulf, which is, of course, around
12,000 feet.
which are very poorly known. As a matter of fact,
one of them is represented by, so far as I'm aware,
only three specimens in the world. And I have taken
two of those three. And as a consequence, with all
the work I've done in the bottom of the Gulf, and
since this is the only place that I've found it,
Of course, extremely curious as to how some of
these forms are able to reproduce and to sustain
the small populations they have. It would be
intriguing to think they live for long, long
periods of time and that they're electoral, but on
the other hand, I doubt that very much. But
nevertheless, the crabs are an interesting
group. Then, furthermore, another intriguing
sort of thing is that the giant isopod, which is a
crustacean group as well, which lives in the Gulf
and the Caribbean, the largest isopod known,
which measures up to around 12, 14 inches in length
and about 4 1â„2 to 5 inches wide, is, again, I think,
a possible source of... of food of a particular
type. And I was intrigued by the fact that I
discovered that these things swim. I think I
mentioned this in a previous interview, but I'm
not sure. Most unlikely heavy-bodied creatures,
swimmers, but apparently they do. As a matter of
fact, I know they do because I've taken movies of
them in around 5,000 feet of water.
In addition to that, my wife and I have teamed up to
describe a number of new species among a very
fascinating group of crustaceans known as
Galatheids. These are a rather strange group
related to hermit crabs. They look very much like
miniature lobsters. And we've found these, as I
believe I've mentioned previously, in all depths
of the sea. But the intriguing thing about them is
that they sort out as to generic or taxonomic type
very nicely. There being a group belonging to a
genus Munida, which exists primarily, almost
exclusively, in shelf and shallow upper
continental slope waters, whereas the group
Munidopsis tends to go into much deeper water. And
we find some very nice ecological separations of
these forms and some very nice and interesting
geographic distributions. Here again, forms
that are not terribly well known.
And then, of course, I was intrigued by that group
that are so enigmatic, the polychelids, which are
forms that we know next to nothing about. As I have
remarked repeatedly to students, I have no a
reason for understanding why we've never been
able to photograph these things in our bottom
photography or our movies, whereas most other
groups are well represented in our photographic
collection of deep sea organisms. We know they're
on the surface because we troll them, but we can't
figure out unless they're extremely fast, which
is possible, in their movements, why we have not
been able to obtain pictures of them. And there are
a lot of other things about them that are
interesting. I had a student, Dick Firth, who
studied them for some years, and he couldn't
figure out either why we didn't photograph them.
Now, I'm sure I've left some things out, but the
crustaceans are fascinating group of organisms.
They serve the sea as the insects serve on land. As
you know, there are very few insects in the sea,
extremely small number. We've got one out there, a
bug, Halobates micans, that runs around on the
surface of the sea. But it's cosmopolitan or
rather widely distributed species. Other than
that, there are very few insects in the marine
environment. Could you tell us a little bit about
your work in underwater photography, these
movies and photographic surveys you've done?
Yes.
I first got into bottom photography as a result of
dredging some
iron-rich sediments, indurated sediments,
consolidated sediments in the eastern Gulf of
Mexico. The thing that intrigued me, in addition
to the fact that it's very high in iron content, was
that there were some organisms living on the bits
of iron stone. And since rock is at a premium in the
Gulf of Mexico, exposed rock, I returned there
rather repeatedly. And what I wanted to do was
prove two things. One, that this was truly rock and
was not something that had been dropped from old
sailing vessels as ballast rock, but that it was in
situ and formed there in this very remote section,
the center section of the eastern Gulf of Mexico.
And so I obtained a small bottom camera and began
taking pictures. I had surmised also, because of
the nature of the organisms on this ironstone,
that there had to be a current flowing at the bottom
there, and yet There were, at that time, there were
very few records of deep bottom currents. Now the
depth here was on the order of 10,000, 10,000 to
11,000 feet, so that's fairly deep water. There
was no theoretical rationale in physical
oceanography to explain this current, nor is it
adequately explained right now. I've got some
ideas. But I'm not certain about it. I think the
current may be related, actually, to the
intensity of trade winds. But that's gotten far
afield at the moment. At any rate, I got the
photographs of the Ironstone after a lot of tries
and then got very definite evidence of a bottom
current. And so although I'm a biologically
inclined individual, I did publish a paper on the
ironstone with some colleagues, and also on this
bottom current, which was among the few bottom
currents of any consequence that had been
reported on at that time. I became then intrigued
because of the stills that I was getting of certain
animals with the potential of using movies
underwater in very deep water. And
unfortunately, I have such a backlog of work that I
have not explored that properly and don't know
whether I'll have enough years left to do it. It is a
very intriguing thing. I
ran into some problems of wanting to use a rather
large Aeroflex camera with a large film reel and
getting an underwater case to house it. None was
available on the market, so we had to fabricate our
own. cast around for months trying to find some
suitable material large enough that would
withstand the pressure. And I thought, of course,
it had to be aluminum. I finally found that there
was an extrusion plant that extruded tubing with a
16-inch ID and perhaps thick enough to work. And
the guy that I talked to was intrigued enough by it
to say, well, you could probably supply it to me for
$300 or $400, enough to do the job. This was an Air
Force piece of equipment and was housed in a
commercial plant. Well, I thought everything was
going to be go, and yet when I got down to cases with
the actual company where the thing was, I found
out, yeah, it probably would be $300 for the first
two feet of it, But it would cost me $16,000 for a
startup fee. So I went into that trouble. Finally,
we made one out of laminated. We took a three-inch
aluminum flat plate, cut it, and stacked it like
so, and machined out the opening we wanted. And
then we had to put O-rings. So we've got a stacked
case of about eight different or layers of this
stuff. And then we put in the port in the front. It
worked beautifully, except that it was necessary
to anchor the ship. And to anchor the ship in deep
water takes some doing in the first place. But I've
done it. But I must say that There has been a marked
change in the weather in the Gulf of Mexico in the
last five years. It is getting worse, and I believe
it is a trend. Just a personal belief that the wind
fields are intensifying, and we have much more
wind and rougher seas than we had in the 60s. And
therefore, it was hard for me to hold the ship at
anchor And thus I lost a lot of ship time. And it
would really require to do a beautiful job of
underwater movies, which I wanted to do. I had it
all set to leave it on the bottom. It
would take a lot of ship time and a separate
proposal of the National Science Foundation. And
right now I have just too many other things to do.
And maybe in my closing couple of years or so I'm
going to try it. I don't know. Now, would you just
leave this camera floating free down there? No, it
would be on a tripod, and I had it programmed so that
it was on 15 seconds out of every 5 minutes, and I
could leave it down for 36 hours. And I would have to
take a chance, is what I would find. But what I was
doing... was and i got some pretty good stuff
actually in the short time that i did use it was
selecting the places where my trawling told me the
organisms i would like to photograph were
actually present now obviously we have to go
through this metal calibration because whenever
you drag a net through the water for plankton or
whatever you drag a trawl on the bottom for bottom
organisms You always bring up the accumulated
mass, which is, of course, spaced out here. And
what you hope is that your mean free path is not so
disadvantageous to you that you miss most of the
organisms. But they obviously, in many
instances, are scattered out. And it's like a
cloud chamber, or it's like a collision of
molecules. You may or you may not. And what we
deduce from what we get may be rather far from the
truth. But there's one thing I'm certain of, is
that organisms are widely scattered in the bottom
of the ocean. And I'm pretty lucky to get in. So I
also baited it. Now, this man, John Isaacs, has
done some magnificent and fascinating work with
bottom photography with a monster camera, which
he uses an entirely different technique, and his
colleague out there, one of them, Hessler, Robert
Hessler, has used it to advantage also. They put a
big five-gallon can loaded with rotten fish down,
and then they've got the camera held aloft, and
they just drop it. Bang. And then it's got a
time-release magnesium bar, and that magnesium
bar goes into solution, and after so many hours,
the bar breaks loose in it. The thing comes back to
the surface, and I guess they've got radio stuff on
it. I don't know. But at any rate, they attract
organisms in, and it's fascinating to see those
things come in. Of course, it's time-lapse, so
you've got a shot. You can see these organisms come
creeping in. And you can see things sometimes
swimming by, sedately moving crustaceans and So
if you do manage to get in touch with this man and get
some kind of appointment, you must interrogate
him about his monster camera because it's really
very interesting. Do you see the biggest
potential in this being the observation of
behavior or more qualitative sampling of what is
there? Well, we know both,
obviously. important things. As far as we're
concerned, we know so little about the deep ocean
and its biota, biota in the sense of bacteria being
plants, because there isn't much else down there
in that plant life, maybe some fungi. But at any
rate, these
things are so poorly known, and we know so little
about the effects of pressure We know so little
about what controls the distribution of these
organisms. Well, we can surmise that food is
important, but I'm talking about vertical
distribution. And although years ago pressure
was ruled out as being significant, I'm quite sure
that it is significant. And I think that these
kinds of things, photographic probes,
depicting the organism while we are testing them
in other ways. For example, using caged organisms
with the camera in the cage could give us a great
deal of information on behavior upon the
susceptibility of the organism to various
pressure effects and so on. In addition, we
probably can get some idea of how far away these
organisms can be attracted by scent, so to speak,
by putting these baits down and having more than
one camera to get an idea of where they are coming in
from and how far out and so on and so on. So, yeah, I
think there's great potential. It's very
intriguing. It's just another mode for man to
satisfy his curiosity, I think. You gentlemen,
I'm sure, are aware of the importance of that to the
welfare of all people, whether they be
politicians or biologists, which are the same.
We're all biologists, biologically inclined.
Those are some of my photographs, too. Yes, I was
noticing those. That's part of the reason I was
asking about the photographs.
I'm interested, too, and do you think there's a
permanent wind change in the, by permanent, I mean
the next several years or so in the Gulf? Well, now,
I'm not an authority at all on that, but I would say
this, that Reed Bryson at Wisconsin, a
meteorologist who is controversial,
has made some worldwide studies of climatic
change. And indeed, he issued a report for the CIA,
which you probably have recently seen, because of
the potential impact of weather change phenomena
on food supplies, and thus the possibility of
world upheaval as famine began to strike. I think
this is a real danger, that famine will trigger
riots and uprisings that will be extremely
serious. Well, at any rate, some years back when
the debate was going on among meteorologists, I
followed some of it in the literature. And at the
same time, I was experiencing great changes in the
climate of the Gulf. Now, the changes that he's
predicting are long-range changes. And so I do not
think that it's a minor perturbation. I think,
yes, it is important and a phase change. It's
possible. Who knows? I don't. But it wouldn't take
a lot to convince me that we are moving possibly
into another glacial period. So I don't have any
evidence for it. I don't against it. But at any
rate,
conjecture indicates it would be a darn good
possibility.